Niall Ferguson: IN OUR
TIME, WEVE WITNESSED
THE ZENITH OF GLOBAL FINANCE.
IN 2006, THE WORLDS
TOTAL ECONOMIC OUTPUT
WAS WORTH AROUND $47 TRILLION.
THATS 47 FOLLOWED BY 12 ZEROES.
THE TOTAL VALUE OF
STOCK AND BOND MARKETS
WAS ROUGHLY $119 TRILLION,
MORE THAN TWICE THE SIZE,
AND THE AMOUNT
OUTSTANDING OF THE STRANGE
NEW FINANCIAL LIFE FORM
KNOWN AS DERIVATIVES
WAS $473 TRILLION,
10 TIMES LARGER.
BY THE SUMMER OF 2007, IT
SEEMED AS IF THE EARTH
HAD TURNED INTO PLANET FINANCE.
AS NEVER BEFORE, THE
WORLD WAS INTERCONNECTED
BUT NOT JUST BY CABLES,
CONTAINER SHIPS,
AND JET PLANES.
BY 24/7 DEALING ROOMS
AND INTERNATIONAL
INVESTMENT BANKS.
WEVE SEEN HOW THE MARKETS
FOR CREDIT, BONDS,
STOCKS, INSURANCE,
AND REAL ESTATE
ALL EVOLVED IN NORTH AMERICA
AND ORIGINATED IN EUROPE.
WELL, NOW ITS TIME
TO TELL THE STORY
OF HOW THOSE
FINANCIAL INNOVATIONS
CONQUERED THE WORLD.
THIS IS THE STORY OF
FINANCIAL GLOBALIZATION.
GLOBALIZATION IS SOMETHING
WE TAKE FOR GRANTED TODAY,
AND YET FOR ALL THE ADVANTAGES
OF AN INTERCONNECTED WORLD,
PERFECTLY EXEMPLIFIED
BY HONG KONGS
ASTONISHING, HUMMING
CONTAINER PORT,
THERES A DOWNSIDE
TO GLOBALIZATION,
AND THAT IS ITS VULNERABILITY,
ITS VULNERABILITY
TO FINANCIAL SHOCKS
BECAUSE FINANCE ISNT
AN EXACT SCIENCE
AND ITS VULNERABILITY
TO POLITICAL FORCES
BEYOND THE CONTROL
OF THE BANKERS.
THE ASCENT OF MONEY
HAS SELDOM BEEN SMOOTH.
TIME AND AGAIN,
ITS BEEN PUNCTUATED
BY BIG AND PAINFUL CRISES.
JUST 10 YEARS AGO, IT
SEEMED THAT THESE CRISES
WERE MORE LIKELY TO BLOW UP IN
EMERGING MARKETS LIKE ASIA,
YET TODAY ITS THE
WEST THATS CAUGHT UP
IN A FULL-BLOWN CREDIT CRUNCH,
AND WHATS FASCINATING
IS THAT THIS CRISIS
HAD ITS ORIGINS IN THE
AMERICAN PROPERTY MARKET
AND A SYSTEM OF MORTGAGE LENDING
THAT WEVE SOUGHT TO EXPORT
TO THE REST OF THE WORLD.
Man: 15 MINUTES!
[MEN YELL]
Announcer: FUNDING FOR
THE ASCENT OF MONEY
WAS PROVIDED BY...
MY IDEA CREATED JOBS
FOR 2,000 PEOPLE.
MY IDEA WILL BRING RENEWABLE
ENERGY TO EVERYONE.
AN ENTREPRENEUR WITH AN
IDEA CAN CHANGE THE WORLD.
I HAVE AN IDEA.
AND BY...
...AND BY...
[MEN YELLING]
Man: 15 MINUTES.
AN ENGLISHMANS
HOME IS HIS CASTLE,
AND AMERICANS KNOW THAT THERE
IS NO PLACE LIKE HOME, TOO,
EVEN IF ALL THE HOMES
ARE RATHER SIMILAR.
TODAY, WE TAKE THE
UNIVERSAL RIGHT
TO OWN OUR OWN HOME FOR GRANTED.
BUT BEFORE THE 1930s,
NO MORE THAN 2/5 OF
AMERICAN HOUSEHOLDS
WERE OWNER/OCCUPIERS.
THE REVOLUTION THAT CREATED A
NEW PROPERTY-OWNING DEMOCRACY
WAS BORN OUT OF A GREAT
AMERICAN FINANCIAL CRISIS.
WHEN THE DEPRESSION
STRUCK IN 1929,
THE U.S. ECONOMY NOSEDIVED.
SOME OF THOSE WHO DID
OWN THEIR OWN HOMES
COULDNT AFFORD THE
MORTGAGE PAYMENTS.
TENANTS, TOO, STRUGGLED
TO PAY THE RENT
WHEN ALL THEY HAD
COMING IN WAS THE DOLE.
NOWHERE WERE THE EFFECTS OF
THE DEPRESSION MORE PAINFUL
THAN IN DETROIT.
SOON, THE AUTOMOBILE
INDUSTRY HERE EMPLOYED
ONLY HALF THE NUMBER OF
WORKERS IT HAD IN 1929
AND AT HALF THE WAGES.
BY 1932, THE DISPOSSESSED
OF DETROIT HAD HAD ENOUGH.
ON MARCH 7, 5,000
WORKERS LAID OFF
BY THE FORD MOTOR COMPANY
MARCHED TO THE FACTORY
TO DEMAND UNEMPLOYMENT RELIEF.
WHAT FOLLOWED WOULD
FORCE AMERICANS
TO COMPLETELY RETHINK
THEIR ATTITUDE
TO PROPERTY OWNERSHIP.
AS THE UNARMED
CROWD REACHED GATE 4
OF THE COMPANYS RIVER
ROUGE PLANT IN DEARBORN,
SCUFFLES BROKE OUT.
SUDDENLY, THE
FACTORY GATES OPENED,
AND A PHALANX OF
POLICE AND SECURITY MEN
RUSHED OUT AND FIRED
INTO THE CROWD.
[GUNSHOT]
5 WORKERS WERE KILLED.
DAYS LATER, 60,000 PEOPLE
SANG THE INTERNATIONALE
AT THEIR FUNERAL.
THE COMMUNIST PARTY NEWSPAPER
ACCUSED EDSEL FORD,
SON OF THE FIRMS FOUNDER
HENRY, OF ALLOWING A MASSACRE.
COULD ANYTHING BE DONE TO
DEFUSE WHAT WAS BEGINNING
TO SEEM LIKE A
REVOLUTIONARY SITUATION,
PITTING THE SERIOUSLY
PROPERTIED FORDS
AGAINST THEIR PROPERTYLESS
EX-EMPLOYEES?
IN A REMARKABLE GESTURE
OF CONCILIATION,
EDSEL FORD TURNED TO A MEXICAN
ARTIST NAMED DIEGO RIVERA.
HE INVITED HIM TO PAINT A MURAL
THAT WOULD SHOW DETROITS
ECONOMY AS SITE OF COOPERATION,
NOT CLASS CONFLICT.
DIEGO RIVERA WAS A
LIFE-LONG COMMUNIST.
HIS IDEAL WAS OF A SOCIETY
IN WHICH THERE WOULD
BE NO PRIVATE PROPERTY,
IN WHICH THE MEANS OF PRODUCTION
WOULD BE COMMONLY OWNED.
IN HIS EYES, FORDS
RIVER ROUGE PLANT WAS
THE VERY OPPOSITE,
A CAPITALIST SOCIETY
IN WHICH THE WORKERS WORKED
AND THE PROPERTY OWNERS,
WHO REAPED THE REWARDS
OF THEIR EFFORTS,
MERELY WATCHED.
WHEN THE MURALS WERE
UNVEILED IN 1933,
THE CITYS DIGNITARIES
WERE APPALLED.
THEY SAW THEM AS
COMMUNIST PROPAGANDA,
A TRAVESTY ON THE
SPIRIT OF DETROIT.
THE POWER OF ART IS
A WONDERFUL THING,
BUT IT WAS CLEARLY GOING
TO TAKE SOMETHING RATHER
MORE POWERFUL THAN ART
TO HEAL A SOCIETY SO DEEPLY
SPLIT BY THE DEPRESSION.
OTHER COUNTRIES TURNED TO THE
EXTREMES OF TOTALITARIANISM,
BUT IN THE UNITED STATES,
THE ANSWER WAS THE NEW DEAL,
AND THAT INCLUDED A
NEW DEAL ON HOUSING.
IN RADICALLY INCREASING
THE NUMBER OF AMERICANS
WHO COULD HOPE TO
OWN THEIR OWN HOMES,
THE ROOSEVELT ADMINISTRATION
PIONEERED THE IDEA
OF A PROPERTY-OWNING DEMOCRACY.
IT PROVED TO BE THE PERFECT
ANTIDOTE TO RED REVOLUTION.
IN EFFECT, THE GOVERNMENT
WOULD RIG THE HOUSING MARKET
TO INCENTIVIZE AMERICANS
TO BECOME PROPERTY OWNERS.
CUSTOMERS AT LOCAL
MORTGAGE LENDERS
KNOWN AS SAVINGS AND LOANS
WOULD HAVE THEIR DEPOSITS
GUARANTEED BY THE GOVERNMENT,
EVEN IF THE SAVINGS
AND LOAN WENT BUST.
CRUCIALLY, A NEW FEDERAL
HOUSING ADMINISTRATION
WAS SET UP TO OFFER
LARGER, LONGER,
AND LOWER INTEREST LOANS.
AFTER THE 1930s, MOST
MORTGAGES IN THE UNITED STATES
WERE FIXED FOR 20 OR 30 YEARS.
A NEW FEDERAL NATIONAL
MORTGAGE ASSOCIATION,
NICKNAMED FANNIE MAE,
WAS SET UP TO CREATE
A NATIONWIDE MARKET
FOR HOME LOANS.
News reel announcer: THIS
COUPLE IS GOING THROUGH
A MODEL HOUSE NOW.
THE HUSBAND APPARENTLY ISNT
VERY KEEN ABOUT IT ALL,
BUT HIS WIFE IS ENTRANCED
BY SUCH CONVENIENT FEATURES
AS THIS STURDY
BUILT-IN IRONING BOARD.
Ferguson: BY REDUCING THE
MONTHLY COST OF A MORTGAGE,
THESE REFORMS MADE HOME
OWNERSHIP POSSIBLE
FOR MANY MORE AMERICANS
THAN EVER BEFORE.
News reel announcer: THEY BOTH
WOULD LIKE TO HAVE THIS PLACE
FOR THEIR VERY OWN.
TOO BAD THEY CANT AFFORD IT.
AH, BUT MAYBE THEY CAN,
FOR ACCORDING TO THIS SIGN,
THEY CAN BUY THIS HOUSE
WITH MONTHLY PAYMENTS
THAT ARE LESS THAN
THEY NOW SPEND FOR RENT.
Ferguson: ITS NOT
TOO MUCH TO SAY
THAT THE MODERN UNITED STATES,
WITH ITS SEDUCTIVELY
SAMEY SUBURBS,
WAS BORN OUT OF THESE
NEW DEAL REFORMS.
FROM THE 1930s THEN,
THE U.S. GOVERNMENT
EFFECTIVELY UNDERWROTE
THE MORTGAGE MARKET,
BRINGING BORROWERS
AND LENDERS TOGETHER,
AND THAT WAS THE REASON
FOR THE BIG EXPLOSION
IN PROPERTY OWNERSHIP
AND MORTGAGE DEBT IN THE
DECADES AFTER WORLD WAR II.
THERE WAS JUST ONE CATCH.
NOT EVERYONE IN AMERICAN SOCIETY
HAD AN INVITATION TO THE
PROPERTY-OWNING PARTY.
WHEN THESE HOUSES WERE BUILT
IN DETROIT BACK IN 1941,
WHETHER YOU GOT THE MONEY
OR NOT FOR A MORTGAGE
DEPENDED ON WHICH SIDE
OF THIS DIVIDE YOU LIVED.
IT WAS A REAL ESTATE DEVELOPER
WHO BUILD THIS 6-FOOT-HIGH WALL
RIGHT THROUGH THE MIDDLE OF
DETROITS 8 MILE DISTRICT.
HE HAD TO BUILD IT IN
ORDER TO QUALIFY FOR LOANS
FROM THE FEDERAL
HOUSING ADMINISTRATION.
THE LOANS WERE TO BE
GIVEN FOR CONSTRUCTION
ON THAT SIDE OF THE WALL,
WHICH WAS A PREDOMINANTLY
WHITE NEIGHBORHOOD.
ON THIS SIDE, ON
THE BLACK SIDE,
THERE WAS TO BE
NO FEDERAL CREDIT
BECAUSE AFRICAN-AMERICANS
WERE REGARDED
AS FUNDAMENTALLY UNCREDITWORTHY.
IT WAS PART OF A SYSTEM
THAT DIVIDED WHOLE CITIES,
IN THEORY, BY CREDIT RATING,
IN PRACTICE, BY COLOR.
SEGREGATION, IN OTHER
WORDS, WASNT ACCIDENTAL
BUT A DIRECT CONSEQUENCE
OF FEDERAL POLICY.
THIS MAP BY THE FEDERAL
HOME LOAN BOARD SHOWS
THE PREDOMINANTLY BLACK AREAS
OF DETROIT, THE LOWER EAST SIDE
AND SO-CALLED COLONIES
LIKE THE ONE WERE IN
NOW IN BURWOOD-GRIGGS,
MARKED WITH THE LETTER
D AND COLORED RED.
YOU CAN SEE WHY THE PRACTICE
OF GIVING WHOLE NEIGHBORHOODS
A NEGATIVE CREDIT RATING CAME
TO BE KNOWN AS RED-LINING.
THE RESULT WAS THAT WHEN
PEOPLE FROM AROUND HERE
NEEDED MORTGAGES,
THEY HAD TO PAY
SIGNIFICANTLY HIGHER
INTEREST RATES
THAN THE FOLKS IN THE
WHITE PART OF TOWN.
HALF A CENTURY LATER, THE
TWO CATEGORIES OF BORROWERS
WOULD COME TO BE
KNOWN EUPHEMISTICALLY
AS PRIME AND SUBPRIME,
BUT IN THE 1960s,
THIS DIVIDE WAS
THE HIDDEN FINANCIAL DIMENSION
OF THE CIVIL RIGHTS STRUGGLE.
BLACKS WERE TO BE EXCLUDED
FROM THE NEW
PROPERTY-OWNING SOCIETY.
THERE WOULD BE A HEAVY PRICE
TO PAY FOR THIS EXCLUSION.
ON JULY 23, 1967,
PROPERTY IN DETROIT
LITERALLY WENT UP IN FLAMES.
Man: 4 DAYS OF RIOTING,
LOOTING, AND ARSON ROCKED
THE CITY OF DETROIT
IN THE WORST OUTBREAK OF URBAN
RACIAL VIOLENCE THIS YEAR.
Ferguson: ANGER AT
ECONOMIC DISCRIMINATION
SPILLED OVER INTO
5 DAYS OF RIOTING
THAT LEFT 43 PEOPLE DEAD.
SIGNIFICANTLY, MOST OF
THE VIOLENCE WAS DIRECTED
NOT AGAINST PEOPLE
BUT AGAINST PROPERTY.
NEARLY 3,000 BUILDINGS
WERE LOOTED OR BURNED.
THE REAL LESSON
FOR POLICY MAKERS
WAS THAT EXCLUDING
ETHNIC MINORITIES
FROM THE PROPERTY-OWNING
DEMOCRACY
WAS A FAST TRACK TO TROUBLE.
TO MAKE PEOPLE FEEL
LIKE STAKEHOLDERS
IN THE SOCIAL STATUS QUO,
YOU HAD TO MAKE THEM
PROPERTY OWNERS.
INDEED, WIDENING
HOME OWNERSHIP
MIGHT EVEN TURN THE MALCONTENTS
INTO CONSERVATIVES.
THIS WAS A LESSON THAT MARGARET
THATCHER WAS QUICK TO LEARN.
IN BRITAIN, THE IDEA OF THE
PROPERTY-OWNING DEMOCRACY
BECAME A KEYSTONE OF
1980s CONSERVATISM.
BY SELLING OFF COUNCIL HOUSING
AT BARGAIN BASEMENT PRICES,
THATCHER ENSURED THAT MORE
AND MORE BRITISH COUPLES
HAD A HOME OF THEIR OWN.
THAT ALSO MEANT THAT MORE
PEOPLE THAN EVER HAD MORTGAGES.
UP UNTIL THE 1980s,
GOVERNMENT INCENTIVES
TO BORROW MONEY AND BUY A
HOUSE MADE PRETTY GOOD SENSE
FOR THE AVERAGE BRITISH FAMILY.
INTEREST RATES
WERE RELATIVELY LOW
IN THE SIXTIES AND SEVENTIES,
AND THE INFLATION RATE
TENDED TO CREEP UP
SO THAT THE REAL VOLUME OF
MORTGAGE DEBT TENDED TO FALL,
BUT THERE WAS A
STING IN THE TAIL.
THE VERY SAME GOVERNMENTS
THAT PROFESSED THEIR FAITH
IN THE PROPERTY-OWNING DEMOCRACY
WERE ALSO COMMITTED
TO FIGHTING INFLATION,
AND THAT MEANT RAISING
INTEREST RATES.
THE BRITISH AND AMERICAN
POLICY OF ENCOURAGING
PEOPLE TO TAKE OUT MORTGAGES
AND THEN CRANKING UP INTEREST
RATES LED IN THE LATE EIGHTIES
TO ONE OF THE MOST
SPECTACULAR BOOMS AND BUSTS
IT WAS TO THE EIGHTIES
WHAT THE SUBPRIME MELTDOWN
HAS BEEN IN OUR OWN TIME,
THE FIRST BUT NOT THE LAST TIME
THAT AMERICAS MORTGAGE MARKET
HAS GONE STARK-RAVING MAD.
[INDISTINCT SHOUTING]
TO MANY OF US, ITS
COME AS A SHOCK
THAT A CRASH IN THE
AMERICAN PROPERTY MARKET
COULD TRIGGER A MAJOR
FINANCIAL CRISIS.
IN FACT, AS SO OFTEN
IN THE ASCENT OF MONEY,
ITS HAPPENED BEFORE.
[TIRES SQUEAL]
[HORN HONKS]
IN MARCH 1984, AMERICAN
GOVERNMENT REGULATORS
RECEIVED A COPY
OF A VIDEO SHOWING
MILE AFTER MILE OF HALF-BUILT
HOUSES AND CONDOMINIUMS
ALONG INTERSTATE 30 JUST
OUTSIDE DALLAS IN TEXAS.
YOU CAN STILL SEE THE
EMPTY SLABS TODAY.
THE INVESTIGATION TRIGGERED
BY THESE UNBUILT HOMES
WOULD EXPOSED ONE OF
THE BIGGEST FINANCIAL
SCANDALS OF ALL TIME,
A SCAM THAT WOULD MAKE A
MOCKERY OF THE IDEA OF PROPERTY
AS A SAFE FORM OF INVESTMENT.
THIS ISNT A STORY
ABOUT REAL ESTATE--
MORE LIKE SURREAL ESTATE.
SAVINGS AND LOAN ASSOCIATIONS,
AMERICAS BUILDING SOCIETIES,
WERE NOT ONLY CENTRAL TO
ROOSEVELTS NEW DEAL ON HOUSING.
BY THE 1970s, THEY WERE
THE FOUNDATION OF AMERICAS
PROPERTY-OWNING DEMOCRACY.
THEN IN THE 1970s, THE
SAVINGS AND LOAN INDUSTRY
WAS FIRST HIT BY
DOUBLE-DIGIT INFLATION
AND THEN BY HIGHER
INTEREST RATES.
IT WAS A LETHAL DOUBLE-PUNCH
FOR INSTITUTIONS
THAT WE RE FORBIDDEN BY
LAW TO RAISE THE RATES
THEY PAID TO SAVERS
AND WHICH WERE RECEIVING
INTEREST PAYMENTS
FROM LOCAL MORTGAGE BORROWERS
THAT HAD BEEN FIXED
DECADES BEFORE.
THE RESPONSE IN WASHINGTON
WAS TO REMOVE NEARLY
ALL THESE RESTRICTIONS.
WHEN DEREGULATION
WAS ENACTED IN 1982,
PRESIDENT REAGAN WAS ELATED.
ALL IN ALL, I THINK
WE HIT THE JACKPOT.
Ferguson: WELL, SOME
PEOPLE CERTAINLY DID.
LIBERATED FROM THE
OLD CONSTRAINTS,
THE PEOPLE RUNNING
SAVINGS AND LOANS
SUDDENLY SAW A CHANCE TO
MAKE SOME SERIOUS MONEY
FROM THE ONCE BORING
BUSINESS OF MORTGAGE LENDING.
BY RAISING SAVINGS RATES,
THEY COULD ATTRACT MUCH
MORE MONEY FROM DEPOSITORS.
THEN THEY COULD
USE THESE DEPOSITS
AS THE BASIS FOR AS MANY
LOANS AS THEY LIKED.
CRUCIALLY, THOUGH, ONE
THING DIDNT CHANGE.
SAVERS DEPOSITS WERE STILL
INSURED BY THE GOVERNMENT.
IT WAS AN INVITATION TO
A GIGANTIC FREE LUNCH
FOR FINANCIAL COWBOYS.
THIS IS THE WISE CIRCLE
GRILL JUST OUTSIDE DALLAS,
FILLED EVERY LUNCHTIME
WITH LOCAL CITIZENS OF
UNBLEMISHED INTEGRITY.
20 YEARS AGO, THE CLIENTELE
WAS RATHER DIFFERENT.
THE CITY OF DALLAS HAD
MORE THAN ITS FAIR SHARE
OF FRAUDULENT
SAVINGS AND LOANS,
AND THIS WAS WHERE THE
DALLAS PROPERTY COWBOYS
THE WISE CIRCLE GRILL WAS
THE PLACE TO HAVE BRUNCH
WHEN THEY WERE WHOOPING IT UP ON
THEIR SOUTHFORK-STYLE RANCHES.
IT WAS ALL VERY, VERY 1980s.
ONE GROUP OF
DALLAS DEVELOPERS,
THE EMPIRE SAVINGS
AND LOAN ASSOCIATION
OFFERED THE PERFECT OPPORTUNITY
TO MAKE MONEY OUT OF THIN AIR,
OR RATHER OUT OF
FLAT TEXAN LAND.
THE SURREAL SAGA OF
EMPIRE SAVINGS AND LOANS
BEGAN WHEN CHAIRMAN
SPENCER BLAIN TEAMED UP
WITH A FLAMBOYANT
HIGH-SCHOOL DROPOUT
TURNED PROPERTY DEVELOPER
NAMED DANNY FAULKNER,
WHOSE SPECIALITY WAS
EXTRAVAGANT GENEROSITY
WITH OTHER PEOPLES MONEY.
THE MONEY IN QUESTION CAME IN
THE FORM OF DEPOSIT ACCOUNTS
ON WHICH EMPIRE PAID ALLURINGLY
HIGH INTEREST RATES.
THIS IS FAULKNER POINT,
ONE OF THE VERY
FIRST DEVELOPMENTS
THAT DANNY FAULKNER
NEVER BUILT,
AND IT SPAWNED A
VERITABLE EMPIRE
OF FAULKNER CREST, FAULKNER
CREEK, FAULKNER CRESCENT,
FAULKNER FOUNTAIN,
FAULKNER OAKS.
DANNY FAULKNERS FAVORITE
TRICK WAS THE FLIP.
HE WOULD BUY SOME PARCEL
OF LAND FOR PEANUTS
AND THEN SELL IT ON
TO NAIVE INVESTORS,
WHO GOT THE MONEY LENT TO THEM
BY, YOU GUESSED IT,
EMPIRE SAVINGS AND LOANS.
[COIN RATTLES]
AND DANNY FAULKNER MAY HAVE
CLAIMED THAT HE WAS ILLITERATE,
BUT HE CERTAINLY
WASNT INNUMERATE.
MANY INVESTORS NEVER
EVEN GOT A CHANCE
TO VIEW THEIR
PROPERTIES CLOSE UP.
FAULKNER WOULD SIMPLY FLY
THEM OVER IN HIS HELICOPTER
WITHOUT LANDING.
BY 1984, PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT
IN TEXAS WAS OUT OF CONTROL,
PAID FOR BY
GOVERNMENT-GUARANTEED DEPOSITS
THAT WERE EFFECTIVELY
GOING STRAIGHT INTO THE
POCKETS OF THE DEVELOPERS.
ON PAPER AT LEAST,
THE ASSETS OF EMPIRE
HAD GROWN FROM $12
MILLION TO $257 MILLION
IN JUST OVER TWO YEARS.
THE TROUBLE WAS THAT THE DEMAND
FOR CONDOS BY INTERSTATE 30
COULD NEVER POSSIBLY HAVE
KEPT UP WITH THE VAST SUPPLY
THAT WAS BEING GENERATED
BY FAULKNER, BLAIN,
AND THEIR CRONIES.
WHEN THE REGULATORS FINALLY
BLEW THE WHISTLE IN 1984,
THAT REALITY COULD
NO LONGER BE ESCAPED,
AND HUNDREDS OF THE BUILDINGS
THAT THAT THEY ERECTED
ENDED UP BEING BULLDOZED
OR BURNT TO THE GROUND.
TODAY 24 YEARS ON, ITS
STILL A TEXAN WASTELAND.
IN 1991, FAULKNER AND BLAIN
WERE BOTH CONVICTED
AND JAILED FOR FRAUD.
ONE INVESTIGATOR CALLED EMPIRE
ONE OF THE MOST RECKLESS
AND FRAUDULENT LAND
INVESTMENT SCHEMES
IN AMERICAN HISTORY.
IN ALL, NEARLY 500 SAVINGS
AND LOANS COLLAPSED.
ACCORDING TO ONE
OFFICIAL ESTIMATE,
NEARLY HALF HAD SEEN CRIMINAL
CONDUCT BY INSIDERS.
THE FULL COST OF THE
CRISIS WAS $153 BILLION,
MAKING IT ONE OF THE MOST
EXPENSIVE FINANCIAL CRISES
IN AMERICAN HISTORY,
AND THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT,
WHICH HAD DEREGULATED
THE SAVINGS AND LOANS
IN THE FIRST PLACE,
HAD TO PICK UP THE BILL,
WHICH IS ANOTHER WAY OF SAYING
THAT TAXPAYERS FORKED OUT.
IT WAS THE FIRST CLEAR SIGN
THAT THERE MIGHT BE A DOWNSIDE
TO THE IDEA OF THE
PROPERTY-OWNING DEMOCRACY.
YET THE SAVINGS AND LOANS CRISIS
WAS A MERE TREMOR COMPARED
WITH THE PROPERTY EARTHQUAKE
THAT WOULD STRIKE
THE U.S. MARKET 20 YEARS LATER.
SAVINGS AND LOANS WAS
AN ALL-AMERICAN CRISIS,
BUT THE SUBPRIME QUAKE
WOULD SHAKE THE ENTIRE
WORLD OF FINANCE
TO ITS VERY FOUNDATIONS,
BUT FOR THAT TO HAPPEN, FINANCE
HAD TO GO GLOBAL AGAIN.
THE FIRST WORLD WAR AND
THE GREAT DEPRESSION
HAD BETWEEN THEM PUT AN END
TO THE FIRST AGE
OF GLOBALIZATION.
UNTIL THE LATE
1960s, INTERNATIONAL
FINANCE SLUMBERED.
SOME EVEN CONSIDERED IT DEAD.
IN 1944, THE
SOON-TO-BE-VICTORIOUS ALLIES
GATHERED TO DEVISE A NEW
FINANCIAL ARCHITECTURE
FOR THE WORLD.
BUT CAPITAL MOVEMENTS WOULD BE
SUBJECT TO TIGHT REGULATION.
WHEN MONEY DID FLOW
ACROSS NATIONAL BORDERS,
IT WOULD GO FROM
GOVERNMENT TO GOVERNMENT.
THIS NEW FINANCIAL ORDER WAS
TO HAVE TWO GUARDIAN SISTERS
ESTABLISHED HERE IN
WASHINGTON, D.C.,
THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
AND THE INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR
RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT,
LATER KNOWN AS THE WORLD BANK.
BY THE 1970s, HOWEVER,
VAST SUMS OF MONEY
WERE BEING ACCUMULATED
BY THE OIL EXPORTERS
OF THE MIDDLE EAST.
WITH WESTERN BANKERS DESPERATE
TO REINVEST THE MONEY AS LOANS,
THE GUARDIAN SISTERS
RELAXED THEIR GRIP.
FINANCIAL GLOBALIZATION
WAS REBORN.
[HORN HONKS]
THE REGION WHERE THE BANKERS
CHOSE TO LEND THE PETRO-DOLLARS
SEEMED TO PROMISE
THE BEST RETURNS.
NOT FOR THE FIRST TIME
IN FINANCIAL HISTORY,
IT ALSO POSED THE BIGGEST RISKS.
IN 7 YEARS, LATIN AMERICA
QUADRUPLED ITS BORROWINGS
FROM FOREIGNERS
TO MORE THAN $315 BILLION.
THEN IN 1982, MEXICO DECLARED
THAT IT WOULD NO LONGER
BE ABLE TO SERVICE ITS DEBT.
SOON, THE ENTIRE
CONTINENT TEETERED ON
THE VERGE OF BANKRUPTCY.
BUT THE DATE HAD GONE
WHEN INVESTORS COULD
CONFIDENTLY EXPECT
THEIR GOVERNMENT TO SEND A
GUNBOAT TO GET THEIR MONEY BACK
WHEN FOREIGN
BORROWERS MISBEHAVED.
NOW RESPONSIBILITY
FOR SUCH DEBT CRISES
FELL ON THE IMF
AND THE WORLD BANK.
THEY DIDNT HAVE GUNBOATS,
BUT IN RETURN FOR NEW LOANS,
THEY COULD INSIST THAT
LATIN AMERICAN GOVERNMENTS
ADOPT PAINFUL STRUCTURAL
ADJUSTMENT PROGRAMS,
IMPOSED FISCAL DISCIPLINE.
TO AMERICAN ECONOMISTS,
THESE PROGRAMS
ALL MADE PERFECT SENSE,
BUT NOT EVERYONE AGREED.
[YELLING]
TO THE INCREASINGLY VOCAL
CRITICS OF GLOBAL FINANCE,
THE TWO GUARDIAN SISTERS
OF THE POST-WAR ORDER
WERE BEING TRANSFORMED
INTO ECONOMIC HITMEN.
THEY WERE HOLDING
A FINANCIAL GUN
TO THE HEADS OF
THIRD-WORLD GOVERNMENTS...
PROPPING UP DICTATORS, AND
FURTHERING THE INTERESTS OF
YANKEE IMPERIALISM.
AND WOE BETIDE THOSE WHO
RESISTED THE HITMEN.
CONSPIRACY THEORIES FLOURISHED
IN THE ANTIGLOBALIZATION
MOVEMENT.
ACCORDING TO
ONE POPULAR THEORY, TWO
LATIN AMERICAN LEADERS,
JAIME ROLDOS OF ECUADOR AND
OMAR TORRIJOS OF PANAMA,
WERE ACTUALLY ASSASSINATED
FOR RESISTING THE DEMANDS
OF AMERICAN IMPERIALISM.
OF A WORLD BANK-IMF PLOT
AGAINST THIRD-WORLD LEADERS
THAT DOESNT QUITE ADD UP.
AFTER ALL, ITS NOT AS
IF THE UNITED STATES
HAD LENT THAT MUCH MONEY
TO ECUADOR AND PANAMA.
IN THE 1970s, THEY ACCOUNTED
FOR JUST .4% OF TOTAL U.S.
GRANTS AND LOANS.
NOR WERE THEY PARTICULARLY BIG
CUSTOMERS FOR THE UNITED STATES.
AGAIN, LESS THAN .4%
OF TOTAL U.S. EXPORTS.
NOW THOSE JUST DONT STRIKE ME
AS FIGURES WORTH KILLING FOR.
TO SAY THE LEAST, THE IDEA OF
IMF-SPONSORED ASSASSINATIONS
IS A STRETCH.
STILL, THERES NO DOUBT THAT
LENDING MONEY IN LATIN AMERICA
TENDS TO BE A RISKY BUSINESS.
[HORNS HONK]
YOUVE HEARD OF
SUBPRIME BORROWERS.
WELL, WELCOME TO A
SUBPRIME COUNTRY...
ARGENTINA, WHERE ECONOMIC
UNDERACHIEVEMENT
HAS BEEN A WAY OF
LIFE FOR A CENTURY.
MANY ARGENTINES DATE
THE STEADY DECLINE
OF THEIR ECONOMIC FORTUNES
TO A DAY IN FEBRUARY 1946
WHEN THE NEWLY ELECTED PRESIDENT
GENERAL JUAN DOMINGO PERON
CAME HERE TO THE CENTRAL
BANK IN BUENOS AIRES.
HE WAS ASTONISHED
AT WHAT HE SAW.
THERE IS SO MUCH
GOLD, HE MARVELED,
YOU CAN HARDLY WALK
THROUGH THE CORRIDORS.
THE VERY NAME ARGENTINA
SUGGESTS WEALTH, PLENTY.
IT MEANS THE LAND OF SILVER.
THE RIVER FLOWING
PAST THE CAPITAL
IS THE RIO DE LA PLATA,
THE SILVER RIVER.
ONCE UPON A TIME, THERE USED TO
BE TWO HARRODS IN THE WORLD,
ONE IN LONDON IN
KNIGHTSBRIDGE,
AND THE OTHER HERE ON
THE AVENIDA FLORIDA
IN THE HEART OF BUENOS AIRES.
FOUNDED IN 1912,
THIS OTHER HARRODS
IS A REMINDER THAT ARGENTINA
USED TO BE A RICH COUNTRY.
INDEED AT ONE TIME,
ITS PER CAPITAL INCOME
WAS JUST 18% LESS THAN
THAT OF THE UNITED STATES.
INVESTORS WHO FLOCKED
TO BUY ARGENTINE BONDS
HOPED THAT ARGENTINA
WOULD BECOME
THE UNITED STATES
OF SOUTH AMERICA.
IS A CLASSIC ILLUSTRATION
THAT ALL THE RESOURCES
AND TALENT IN THE WORLD
CAN BE SET AT NAUGHT BY CHRONIC
FINANCIAL MISMANAGEMENT.
THERE HAVE BEEN MANY FINANCIAL
CRISES IN ARGENTINE HISTORY,
BUT THE CRISIS THAT
HIT THE COUNTRY IN
1989 WAS UNPARALLELED.
AT THE BEGINNING OF FEBRUARY,
THE COUNTRY WAS SUFFERING
ONE OF THE HOTTEST
SUMMERS ON RECORD.
IN BUENOS AIRES, THE
ELECTRICITY SYSTEM
JUST COULDNT COPE.
5-HOUR POWER CUTS
WERE COMMONPLACE.
BUT THESE, AS IT TURNED OUT,
WERE THE LEAST OF
ARGENTINAS PROBLEMS.
AS IS ALMOST ALWAYS THE CASE,
THERE WERE SEVERAL WELL-TRODDEN
STEPS TO MONETARY HELL.
IN STEP ONE, THE
GOVERNMENT SPENDS MORE,
MUCH MORE THAN IT CAN
RAISE IN TAXATION.
USUALLY BUT NOT ALWAYS
ITS BECAUSE OF A WAR.
IN ARGENTINAS CASE,
THERE WERE TWO,
ONE A CIVIL WAR
BETWEEN GENERALS AND
THE LEFT IN THE 1970s,
THE OTHER A FOREIGN
WAR AGAINST BRITAIN
OVER THE FALKLAND
ISLANDS IN 1982.
BY 1989, THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM
WAS ABOUT READY TO BLOW.
BY FEBRUARY, INFLATION HAD
ALREADY REACHED 10% PER MONTH.
BANKS WERE ORDERED TO CLOSE
AS THE GOVERNMENT TRIED
AND PREVENT THE CURRENCYS
EXCHANGE RATE FROM COLLAPSING.
IT DIDNT WORK.
IN JUST A MONTH, THE AUSTRAL
FELL 140% AGAINST THE DOLLAR.
AT THE SAME TIME,
THE WORLD BANK FROZE
LENDING TO ARGENTINA,
SAYING THAT THE GOVERNMENT
HAD FAILED TO TACKLE
THE ROOT CAUSE OF INFLATION, A
BLOATED PUBLIC SECTOR DEFICIT.
WITH NO CHEAP LOANS FORTHCOMING
FROM THE WORLD BANK,
THE GOVERNMENT TRIED
TO FINANCE ITS DEFICIT
BY SELLING BONDS
TO THE PUBLIC,
BUT INVESTORS WERE HARDLY
LIKELY TO BUY BONDS
WITH THE PROSPECT
THAT THEIR REAL VALUE
WOULD BE WIPED OUT BY INFLATION
IN JUST A MATTER OF DAYS.
NOBODY WAS BUYING.
THE GOVERNMENT WAS
RUNNING OUT OF OPTIONS.
IN APRIL, FURIOUS CUSTOMERS
OVERTURNED SHOPPING TROLLEYS
AFTER ONE SUPERMARKET
ANNOUNCED OVER THE LOUDSPEAKER
THAT PRICES WERE BEING
RAISED BY 30% IMMEDIATELY.
SHOPS EMPTIED OF GOODS
AS OWNERS WERENT MAKING
ENOUGH MONEY TO BUY NEW STOCK.
Ferguson: GOVERNMENT
BOND PRICES PLUNGED
AS FEARS ROSE THAT THE
CENTRAL BANKS RESERVES
WERE RUNNING OUT.
WITH NO FOREIGN LOANS AND NO
ONE WILLING TO BUY BONDS,
THERE WAS ONLY ONE THING LEFT
FOR AN INCREASINGLY
DESPERATE GOVERNMENT TO DO,
GET THE CENTRAL BANK LITERALLY
TO PRINT MORE MONEY,
BUT THEY COULDNT
EVEN GET THAT RIGHT.
ON FRIDAY, APRIL 28, ARGENTINA
LITERALLY RAN OUT OF MONEY.
ITS A PHYSICAL PROBLEM, THE
CENTRAL BANK VICE PRESIDENT
TOLD A NEWS CONFERENCE.
WHAT HE MEANT WAS
THAT ARGENTINAS MINT
HAD RUN OUT OF PAPER
TO PRINT NEW NOTES
AND THE PRINTERS
HAD GONE ON STRIKE.
[TIRES SQUEAL]
I DONT KNOW HOW
WERE GOING TO DO IT,
BUT THE MONEY HAS GOT TO BE
THERE ON MONDAY, HE DECLARED.
YET THE FASTER THE
PRINTING PRESSES ROLLED,
THE LESS THE MONEY WAS WORTH.
THE GOVERNMENT WAS FORCED
TO PRINT HIGHER AND HIGHER
DENOMINATIONS OF NOTES.
IN MAY, THE PRICE OF COFFEE
WENT UP BY 50% IN A WEEK.
FARMERS STOPPED BRINGING
CATTLE TO MARKET,
AS THE PRICE FOR ONE
COW WAS NOW THE SAME AS
FOR 3 PAIRS OF SHOES.
BY JUNE 1989, INFLATION
IN ARGENTINA HAD REACHED
A MONTHLY RATE OF 100%,
AN ANNUAL RATE OF
ROUGHLY 12,000%.
IF YOU WANTED TO GO OUT
FOR DINNER IN BUENOS AIRES
ON A SATURDAY NIGHT,
IN MAY YOUD PAY
10,000 AUSTRALES.
BY JUNE, YOUD HAVE TO PAY
20,000 FOR THE SAME MEAL,
AND BY THE FOLLOWING MONTH,
IT WOULD TAKE 60,000.
YOUVE HEARD OF A
FISTFUL OF DOLLARS.
WELL, YOU NEEDED A
DRAWER FULL OF AUSTRALES
JUST TO BUY A SQUARE MEAL.
IN JUNE, POPULAR FRUSTRATION
ERUPTED IN TWO DAYS
OF INTENSE RIOTING AND
LOOTING BY HUNGRY MOBS.
AT LEAST 14 PEOPLE DIED.
IN A COUNTRY WHERE A
STEAK AND A BOTTLE OF WINE
WERE ON PRACTICALLY
EVERY TABLE EVERY DAY,
THOUSANDS WERE EATING IN SOUP
KITCHENS OR GOING HUNGRY.
[BELL TOLLING]
ITS OBVIOUS ENOUGH WHO
LOSES FROM HYPERINFLATION.
VERY RAPIDLY RISING PRICES
ARE BOUND TO WIPE OUT
ANYBODY WHOS DEPENDENT
ON AN INCOME THATS
FIXED IN CASH TERMS--
GROUPS LIKE ACADEMICS
AND CIVIL SERVANTS
ON INFLEXIBLE
MONTHLY SALARIES,
OLD AGE PENSIONERS, AND
PARTICULARLY BOND HOLDERS
LIVING OFF THE INTEREST
ON THEIR INVESTMENTS.
BUENOS AIRES IS ABSOLUTELY FULL
OF ANTIQUES SHOPS LIKE THIS ONE
LADEN DOWN WITH JEWELRY
AND WATCHES AND CUTLERY,
ALL SOLD OFF BY
MIDDLE-CLASS FAMILIES
THE EVENTS OF 1989 IN ARGENTINA
SERVE AS A SALUTARY REMINDER OF
THE DANGERS OF INFLATION.
ANYONE WHO THINKS YOU
CAN SOLVE A FINANCIAL
CRISIS BY PRINTING MONEY
SHOULD PAY A VISIT
TO BUENOS AIRES,
WHERE THE CONSEQUENCES
OF HYPERINFLATION
ARE STILL THERE FOR ALL TO SEE.
ITS RICHLY IRONIC THEN
THAT THE UNITED STATES
USED TO CASTIGATE COUNTRIES LIKE
ARGENTINA FOR PRINTING MONEY
WHEN THATS PRECISELY WHAT THE
FEDERAL RESERVE HAS BEEN DOING
SINCE THE SUBPRIME CRISIS
BEGAN BACK IN AUGUST 2007.
EVEN MORE IRONIC IS THAT
EVEN AS OUR OWN MODEL
OF THE PROPERTY-OWNING
DEMOCRACY HITS THE ROCKS
WERE URGING PEOPLE ALL OVER
THE WORLD TO REPLICATE IT.
ACCORDING TO AN INFLUENTIAL
SCHOOL OF THOUGHT,
PROPERTY OWNERSHIP IS A
MEANS OF UNLOCKING NEW WEALTH
BY PROVIDING COLLATERAL FOR
ASPIRING ENTREPRENEURS.
NOW THAT STRUCTURAL
ADJUSTMENT PROGRAMS
HAVE BEEN CONSIGNED
TO OBLIVION,
EXPORTING THE AMERICAN MODEL OF
OWNING THE HOUSE YOU LIVE IN
IS THE LATEST WESTERN
SOLUTION TO THE PROBLEMS
OF THE WORLDS POOREST COUNTRIES.
THESE SLUMS ON THE
OUTSKIRTS OF BUENOS AIRES
SEEM A MILLION MILES FROM
THE ELEGANT BOULEVARDS
OF THE ARGENTINE
CAPITAL CENTER,
BUT ARE PEOPLE HERE REALLY
AS POOR AS THEY LOOK?
ONE MAN DIDNT BELIEVE SO.
THE PERUVIAN ECONOMIST
HERNANDO DE SOTO
SAW THE SHABBY
RESIDENCES LIKE THESE
IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
ALL OVER THE WORLD
AS REPRESENTING LITERALLY
TRILLIONS OF DOLLARS OF
UNREALIZED WEALTH.
THE PROBLEM IS THAT THE
PEOPLE WHO LIVE HERE
AND IN COUNTLESS SHANTYTOWNS
AROUND THE WORLD
DONT HAVE SECURE LEGAL
TITLE TO THEIR HOMES.
THATS BAD BECAUSE WITHOUT
A LEGAL TITLE TO PROPERTY
YOU CANT USE IT AS
COLLATERAL TO BORROW MONEY,
AND IF YOU CANT BORROW MONEY,
THEN YOU CANT POSSIBLY
RAISE THE CAPITAL YOU NEED
TO START A BUSINESS.
PART OF THE TROUBLE IS
THAT IN POOR COUNTRIES
ITS A BUREAUCRATIC NIGHTMARE
TO ESTABLISH SECURE
LEGAL TITLE TO PROPERTY.
IT CAN TAKE MONTHS,
SOMETIMES YEARS LONGER THAN
IN THE ENGLISH-SPEAKING WORLD.
FOR HERNANDO DE SOTO,
BREATHING FINANCIAL LIFE
INTO ALL THIS DEAD CAPITAL
IS THE KEY TO PROVIDING THE POOR
WITH A MORE PROSPEROUS FUTURE.
THE SHANTYTOWN OF
QUILMES ON THE SOUTHERN
OUTSKIRTS OF BUENOS AIRES
PROVIDES A NATURAL EXPERIMENT
TO TEST DE SOTOS THEORY.
ON ONE SIDE OF THE
TOWN, THERE ARE SOME
OF THE MOST SQUALID
SLUMS IVE EVER SEEN,
BUT JUST A FEW MILES AWAY,
ITS A VERY DIFFERENT STORY.
IT WAS IN THE EARLY 1980s
THAT A GROUP OF SQUATTERS HERE
LOBBIED THE GOVERNMENT
FOR SECURE LEGAL
TITLE TO THEIR HOMES.
WELL, THEY WERE SUCCESSFUL,
AND THOSE WILLING TO
PAY A NOMINAL RENT
WERE GRANTED LEASES,
WHICH AFTER 20 YEARS
CONVERTED INTO FULL OWNERSHIP.
YOU CAN TELL THEYRE
OWNER-OCCUPIED BY THE FACT
THAT THERES A FENCE,
THE WALLS ARE PAINTED.
THERES EVEN A RATHER
EXCITABLE GUARD DOG.
AFTER ALL, OWNERS TEND
TO LOOK AFTER PROPERTIES
BETTER THAN TENANTS,
AND SOME OF THE OWNERS
HERE ARE EVEN REALIZING
THE VALUE OF THEIR PROPERTIES
BY PUTTING THEM UP FOR SALE.
YET THERE SEEMS TO BE
A FLAW IN THE THEORY,
FOR OWNING THEIR OWN
HOMES HASNT MADE IT
SIGNIFICANTLY EASIER FOR
PEOPLE HERE TO BORROW MONEY.
JUST 4% OF THEM HAVE MANAGED
TO SECURE A MORTGAGE.
THE REALITY IS THAT
OWNING PROPERTY
DOESNT GIVE YOU SECURITY.
IT JUST GIVES YOUR
CREDITORS SECURITY.
REAL SECURITY COMES
FROM HAVING AN INCOME.
FOR THAT REASON, IT
PROBABLY ISNT NECESSARY
FOR EVERY ENTREPRENEUR
IN THE DEVELOPING WORLD
TO TAKE OUT A
MORTGAGE ON HIS HOME
OR FOR THAT MATTER ON HER HOME.
IN FACT, PROPERTY OWNERSHIP
MAY NOT BE THE KEY
TO WEALTH GENERATION AT ALL.
SHE RUNS A SMALL COFFEE SHOP
IN EL ALTO, A POOR SUBURB OF
THE BOLIVIAN CAPITAL LA PAZ.
BETTY IS ONE OF AN INCREASINGLY
LARGE NUMBER OF WOMEN
AROUND THE WORLD
WHO HAVE BORROWED MONEY
WITH NO SECURITY AT ALL.
SHES THE PERSONIFICATION
OF AN EXTRAORDINARY
NEW FINANCIAL MOVEMENT
KNOWN AS MICROFINANCE.
DID YOU BORROW THE MONEY TO
SET UP THIS COFFEE STAND?
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
IT WAS TO MAKE THE STAND.
SHE BORROWED MONEY
TO MAKE THE STAND.
HAVE YOU PAID-- AS
SHE PAID IT ALL BACK?
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
SHE PAID OFF WITH THIS BUSINESS
ALREADY A LONG TIME AGO.
OH, I SEE.
STORIES LIKE BETTYS POINT TO
ONE OF THE GREAT REVELATIONS
OF THE MICROFINANCE MOVEMENT
IN A COUNTRY LIKE BOLIVIA.
IT TURNS OUT THAT WOMEN
ARE ACTUALLY A BETTER
CREDIT RISK THAN MEN
WITH OUR WITHOUT A HOME
AS SECURITY FOR THE LOAN.
IT ALL RATHER FLIES IN THE
FACE OF THE CONVENTIONAL IMAGE
OF THE SPENDTHRIFT FEMALE.
THESE WOMEN ARE HARDLY WHAT YOU
WOULD CALL GOOD FINANCIAL RISKS.
THEY PROBABLY HAVE JUST A
FEW DOLLARS BETWEEN THEM,
YET WITH NO SECURITY,
THEYRE BEING LENT MONEY.
HERE IN BOLIVIA, LENDERS
HAVE COME TO REALIZE
THAT CREDITWORTHINESS MAY,
IN FACT, BE A FEMALE TRAIT.
CARMEN VELASCO SET UP PRO
MUJER TO PROVIDE FINANCE
TO POOR BUT ENTERPRISING WOMEN.
BECAUSE THE LOANS ARE
UNSECURED BY PROPERTY,
THE CHALLENGE IS TO GET THE
WOMEN TO PAY THEM BACK,
BUT THEY DO.
FROM DAY ONE,
THEY HAVE TO KNOW
THAT THEY HAVE
TO REPAY ON TIME,
THAT THEY HAVE INTEREST RATES,
AND THEY HAVE TO SAVE.
SO ITS A PROCESS OF LEARNING.
AT THE BEGINNING,
ITS VERY DIFFICULT
BECAUSE THEY ARE NOT
USED TO HANDLE A LOAN,
BUT LITTLE BY LITTLE,
THEY GET USED TO IT,
AND THEY FEEL SO
PROUD WHEN THEY REPAY.
Ferguson: I MUST SAY
IM HUGELY IMPRESSED
BY WHAT IM SEEING
HERE AT PRO MUJER.
YOU CAN SENSE IN
THIS HIVE OF ACTIVITY
THE TRANSFORMATION THAT
MICROFINANCE HAS BROUGHT
INTO THESE WOMENS LIVES,
AND BEHIND ME, YOU CAN
SEE THE BOTTOM LINE,
WOMEN LINING UP TO REPAY
THEIR LOANS PUNCTUALLY.
MAYBE ITS TIME TO CHANGE
THAT OLD CATCH PHRASE
FROM AS SAFE AS HOUSES TO
AS SAFE AS HOUSEWIVES.
OF COURSE, I WOULD BE
A MISTAKE TO ASSUME
THAT MICROFINANCE IS SOME KIND
OF ECONOMIC MAGIC BULLET.
JUST GIVING OUT LOANS
WONT NECESSARILY CONSIGN
POVERTY TO THE MUSEUMS,
BUT THEN BETTING EVERYTHING ON
THE HOUSE WONT DO THAT EITHER.
FINANCIAL ILLITERACY
MAY BE RAMPANT,
BUT SOMEHOW, WE WERE
ALL EXPERTS ON ONE
BRANCH OF ECONOMICS,
THE PROPERTY MARKET.
WE ALL KNEW THAT PROPERTY
WAS A ONE-WAY BET,
EXCEPT THAT IT WASNT.
ALL OVER THE WORLD IT SEEMS
PROPERTY PRICES ARE FALLING
FROM MEMPHIS TO SANTIAGO,
FROM LONDON TO LA PAZ.
ENCOURAGING HOME
OWNERSHIP MAY WELL CREATE
A POLITICAL CONSTITUENCY
FOR CAPITALISM,
BUT IT ALSO DISTORTS
THE CAPITAL MARKET
BY PERSUADING PEOPLE TO BET
THE HOUSE ON, WELL, THE HOUSE.
PEOPLE NEED TO BORROW
MONEY OF COURSE
TO START UP BUSINESSES OR
TO BUY EXPENSIVE ASSETS,
BUT IT SEEMS DANGEROUS TO LURE
THEM INTO STAKING EVERYTHING
ON THE FAR-FROM-RISK-FREE
PROPERTY MARKET.
FROM BUCKINGHAMSHIRE TO
BOLIVIA TO BONNY SCOTLAND,
THE KEY IS TO STRIKE
THE RIGHT BALANCE
BETWEEN DEBT AND INCOME.
AND ITS THAT BALANCE
THAT WEVE MANAGED
TO GET SERIOUSLY WRONG
ON A GLOBAL SCALE.
THIS EXTRAORDINARY PLACE
IS THE SOUTHWESTERN
STOCK EXCHANGE.
ITS WHERE HUNDREDS OF
CHONGQINGS RESIDENTS COME
TO HAVE LUNCH, PLAY PING-PONG,
AND INVEST, OR IS IT
GAMBLE, THEIR SAVINGS
ON THE STOCK MARKET.
THIS IS WHAT DEFINES THE
CHINESE ECONOMY TODAY.
INCREASINGLY, ITS WHAT
DEFINES THE WORLD ECONOMY--
CHINESE INVESTORS TRYING
TO WORK OUT WHAT TO DO
WITH THEIR ABUNDANT SAVINGS.
AFTER YEARS OF INSTABILITY,
CHINESE HOUSEHOLDS SAVE
AN UNUSUALLY HIGH PROPORTION OF
THEIR RAPIDLY RISING INCOMES
IN MARKED CONTRAST
TO AMERICANS,
WHOSE SAVINGS RATE IS
ONLY NOW BEGINNING TO RISE
IN RESPONSE TO THE
GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS.
SO PLENTIFUL ARE CHINESE SAVINGS
THAT FOR THE FIRST
TIME IN CENTURIES
THE DIRECTION OF CAPITAL
FLOW IS NOT FROM WEST TO EAST
FROM EAST TO WEST,
AND IT IS A MIGHTY FLOW.
IN 2007, THE UNITED
STATES NEEDED TO BORROW
AROUND $800 BILLION FROM
THE REST OF THE WORLD.
THATS MORE THAN $4
BILLION EVERY WORKING DAY.
CHINA, BY CONTRAST, RAN A
CURRENT ACCOUNT SURPLUS
EQUIVALENT TO MORE THAN A
QUARTER OF THE U.S. DEFICIT,
AND A REMARKABLY LARGE
PROPORTION OF THAT SURPLUS
HAS ENDED UP BEING LENT
TO THE UNITED STATES.
IN EFFECT, THE PEOPLES
REPUBLIC OF CHINA
HAS BECOME BANKER TO THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
THE AVERAGE AMERICAN
HAS AN INCOME OF
AROUND $44,000 A YEAR,
DESPITE THIS COUNTRYS A
HUNDRED-PLUS BILLIONAIRES
AND ALL THE OSTENTATIOUS
SIGNS OF NEW MONEY HERE
IN CENTRAL CHONGQING,
IS ON AROUND $2,000.
SO WHY WOULD THE LATTER
WANT TO LEND MONEY
TO THE FORMER, WHOS
ROUGHLY 22 TIMES RICHER.
WELL, HERES HOW IT WORKS.
UNTIL RECENTLY FROM
CHINAS POINT OF VIEW,
THE BEST WAY OF EMPLOYING
ITS VAST POPULATION
WAS THROUGH EXPORTING
MANUFACTURES
TO THE INSATIABLY
SPENDTHRIFT U.S. CONSUMER.
TO ENSURE THAT THESE EXPORTS
WERE IRRESISTIBLY CHEAP,
CHINA HAD TO STOP ITS CURRENCY
STRENGTHENING AGAINST THE DOLLAR
BY BUYING LITERALLY BILLIONS
OF DOLLARS ON WORLD MARKETS...
AND UNTIL RECENTLY, THIS SEEMED
TO BE TO AMERICAS BENEFIT, TOO.
HERE IN AMERICA, THE BEST WAY
TO KEEP THE GOOD TIMES ROLLING
IN RECENT YEARS HAS BEEN
TO IMPORT CHEAP CHINESE
GOODS BY THE CONTAINERLOAD
AND SELL THEM IN
OUT-OF-TOWN SUPERSTORES
FOR COMPANIES LIKE WALMART,
OUTSOURCING TO CHINA
HAS BEEN A WAY OF
REAPING VAST PROFITS
FROM CHEAP CHINESE LABOR.
IN 2006 ALONE, WALMART
OUTSOURCED NO LESS
THAN $9 BILLION WORTH
OF GOODS FROM CHINA,
BUT AT THE SAME TIME BY
SELLING BILLIONS DOLLARS
OF BONDS TO THE
PEOPLES BANK OF CHINA,
THE UNITED STATES HAS
BEEN ABLE TO ENJOY
MUCH LOWER INTEREST RATES
THAN WOULD OTHERWISE
HAVE BEEN THE CASE.
ITS WHAT THEY CALL A BUSINESS
SCHOOL A WIN-WIN SITUATION.
THIS IS THE WONDERFUL DUAL
COUNTRY OF CHIMERICA,
ACCOUNTING FOR 33% OF THE
WORLDS ECONOMIC OUTPUT
AND MORE THAN HALF OF ALL GLOBAL
GROWTH IN THE PAST 8 YEARS.
CHIMERICA SEEMED LIKE A
MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN.
THE EAST CHIMERICANS
DID THE SAVING,
THE WEST CHIMERICANS
DID THE SPENDING,
BUT THERE WAS A CATCH.
THE MORE CHINA WAS WILLING TO
LEND TO THE UNITED STATES,
THE MORE AMERICANS
WERE WILLING TO BORROW.
CHIMERICA, IN OTHER WORDS,
WAS THE UNDERLYING CAUSE
OF THE FLOOD OF
NEW BANK LOANS,
BOND ISSUES, AND
DERIVATIVE CONTRACTS
THAT SWEPT PLANET
FINANCE AFTER 2000.
THAT IN TURN WAS THE
UNDERLYING REASON
WHY THE U.S. MORTGAGE MARKET
WAS SO AWASH WITH CASH IN 2006
THAT SUBPRIME MORTGAGES
WERE BEING SOLD TO PEOPLE
WITH NO INCOME, NO JOB,
AND NO ASSETS--NINJAs.
IT WASNT AS IF THE SUBPRIME
MORTGAGE CRISIS OF 2007
WAS HARD TO PREDICT.
MONTHS BEFORE IT BLEW UP,
I WAS IN TENNESSEE
AND IN MICHIGAN
SEEING FOR MYSELF HOW
MANY POORER HOUSEHOLDS
WERE HEADING FOR MORTGAGE
DEFAULT AND FORECLOSURE.
WHAT WAS MUCH HARDER TO
PREDICT WAS HOW A SMALL TREMOR
IN AMERICAS VERY OWN
HOMEGROWN EMERGING MARKET
WOULD CAUSE A FINANCIAL
EARTHQUAKE ALL AROUND THE WORLD.
NOT MANY PEOPLE FORESAW THAT
DEFAULTS ON SUBPRIME MORTGAGES
WOULD SEND SUCH A
SHOCKWAVE AROUND THE WORLD
THAT A BRITISH BANK WOULD
SUFFER THE FIRST RUN SINCE 1866
AND END UP BEING NATIONALIZED
IN AMERICAN INVESTMENT BANKING,
LEHMAN BROTHERS, WOULD GO BUST.
FINANCIAL GLOBALIZATION HAS
BEEN THE CULMINATING EPISODE
OF THE ASCENT OF MONEY,
BUT FOR ALL ITS BENEFITS,
IT HAS ONE SERIOUS COST.
WITH THE FORTUNES OF THE WORLDS
ECONOMIES SO INTERCONNECTED,
WHEN THINGS GO WRONG, THEY
CAN GO VERY WRONG INDEED.
REMEMBER, WEVE
BEEN HERE BEFORE.
A HUNDRED YEARS AGO IN THE
FIRST AGE OF GLOBALIZATION,
MANY INVESTORS THOUGHT
THERE WAS A SIMILARLY
SYMBIOTIC RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN THE WORLDS
FINANCIAL CENTER, BRITAIN,
AND EUROPES MOST DYNAMIC
INDUSTRIAL ECONOMY.
THAT ECONOMY WAS GERMANYS,
AND THE BREAKDOWN OF THAT
RELATIONSHIP ENDED IN WAR.
ON A DAY LIKE TODAY WHEN
THE HONG KONG STOCK MARKET
IS DOWN SHARPLY,
ITS TEMPTING TO ASK
WHETHER ANYTHING COULD
TRIGGER A COMPARABLE BREAKDOWN
IN GLOBALIZATION LIKE THE
ONE THAT HAPPENED IN 1914.
WELL, THE OBVIOUS ANSWER
IS SOME KIND OF CONFLICT
BETWEEN THE UNITED
STATES AND CHINA,
WHETHER OVER TRADE,
TAIWAN, TIBET,
OR SOME OTHER UNFORESEEABLE
BONE OF CONTENTION.
WHAT STARTS WITH COMPETITION
FOR OLYMPIC MEDALS COULD
END IN A BATTLE OVER DOLLARS
IF THE CHINESE ONE DAY DECIDE
TO CUT OFF THEIR CREDIT
LINE TO THE AMERICAN EMPIRE.
MAYBE, AS ITS NAME SUGGESTS,
CHIMERICA IS NOTHING MORE
THAN A CHIMERA, THE MYTHICAL
BEAST OF ANCIENT LEGEND
THAT WAS PART LION,
PART GOAT, PART DRAGON.
A CHINESE-AMERICAN CONFLICT
MAY SOUND IMPLAUSIBLE,
BUT ONE OF THE KEY
POINTS OF THIS SERIES
IS THAT THE REALLY BIG CRISES
COME JUST SELDOM ENOUGH
TO BE BEYOND THE LIVING
MEMORY OF THE PEOPLE WHO RUN
TODAYS COMPANIES,
BANKS, AND FUNDS.
JUST BECAUSE ALL THE SWANS
YOUVE EVER SEEN ARE WHITE
DOESNT MEAN THERE
ARE NO BLACK SWANS.
[INDISTINCT CHATTER]
TODAYS FINANCIAL WORLD IS
THE RESULT OF 4 MILLENNIA
OF ECONOMIC EVOLUTION.
YET DESPITE THE UNPRECEDENTED
COMPLEXITY AND DIVERSITY OF
THE MODERN FINANCIAL SYSTEM,
PLANET FINANCE REMAINS
AS VULNERABLE AS EVER
TO THE AGE-OLD PROBLEM
OF BOOMS AND BUSTS,
IRRATIONAL EXUBERANCE
AND MANIC DEPRESSION.
MAYBE ALL THIS COMPLEXITY
HAS ACTUALLY INCREASED OUR
VULNERABILITY TO CRISIS.
FOR 4,000 YEARS FROM
ANCIENT MESOPOTAMIA
TO MODERN CHINA,
THE ASCENT OF MONEY
HAS BEEN ONE OF THE KEY
FACTORS IN HUMAN PROGRESS,
AN EXTRAORDINARY OF INNOVATION,
INTERMEDIATION, AND INTEGRATION
THAT HAVE DONE AS MUCH AS
ANYTHING TO HELP PEOPLE ESCAPE
FROM THE DRUDGERY OF
SUBSISTENCE AGRICULTURE,
AND YET PLANET FINANCE
CAN NEVER QUITE ESCAPE
FROM THE GRAVITATIONAL
FORCE OF PLANET EARTH
BECAUSE THE QUANTS CAN
NEVER TAKE FULL ACCOUNT
OUR TENDENCY TO UNDERESTIMATE
THE PROBABILITY OF BLACK SWANS,
OUR PROPENSITY TO VEER FROM
EUPHORIA TO DESPONDENCY,
OUR CHRONIC INABILITY
TO LEARN FROM HISTORY,
AND THATS WHY THE COURSE
OF FINANCIAL HISTORY,
LIKE THAT MOST HUMAN
OF EMOTIONS LOVE,
NEVER RUNS SMOOTH
AND NEVER WILL,
NOT EVEN HERE ON THE MAGICAL
AND QUITE POSSIBLE MYTHICAL
COUNTRY OF CHIMERICA.
CAPTIONING MADE POSSIBLE
BY FRIENDS OF NCI
FUNDING FOR THE
ASCENT OF MONEY
WAS PROVIDED BY...
MY IDEA CREATED JOBS
FOR 2,000 PEOPLE.
MY IDEA WILL BRING
RENEWABLE ENERGY
AN ENTREPRENEUR WITH AN
IDEA CAN CHANGE THE WORLD.